# Cost Type {#SecCostType}

<!-- FIXME: Since ane-path requires ANE entities as elements of cost values, why
not define ANE domain first? -->

This document extends the cost types defined in Section 6.1 of [](#RFC7285) by
introducing a new cost-mode "array" and a new cost-metric "ane-path". In the
rest of the document, we use `path-vector` to refer to the combination cost
type which has cost-mode `array` and cost-metric `ane-path`.

## Cost Mode: array{#mode-spec}

<!-- This cost mode is indicated by the string "array". -->
This document extends the CostMode defined in Section 10.5 of [](#RFC7285) with
a new cost mode: `array`. This cost mode indicates that every cost value in a
cost map represents an array rather than a simple value. The values are arrays
of JSONValue. The specific type of each element in the array depends on the cost
metric.

<!-- The extended CostMode is encoded as a string and MUST have a value of either "numerical", "ordinal" or "array" unless it is explicitly specified by a future extension. In particular, this extension has specified that when the cost metric is "ane-path", the cost value MUST be interpreted as a JSONArray of Abstract Network Element Names (defined in [](#nen-spec)). -->

<!-- An ALTO cost service MUST return a JSONArray of JSONValue when the cost mode is "array" unless the interpretation is explicitly specified by other ALTO extensions. -->

## Cost Metric: ane-path{#metric-spec}

This document specifies a new cost metric: `ane-path`. This cost metric
indicates that the cost value is a list of ANEs which the path from a source to
a destination goes across. The values are arrays of ANE names which are defined
in [](#entity-address).

The cost metric `ane-path` SHOULD NOT be used when the cost mode is not `array`
unless it is explicitly specified by a future extension. If an ALTO client send
queries with the cost metric `ane-path` and a non `array` cost mode, the ALTO
server SHOULD return an error with the error code `E_INVALID_FIELD_VALUE`; If an
ALTO server declares the support of a cost type with the cost metric `ane-path`
and a non `array` cost mode, the ALTO client SHOULD assume such a cost type is
invalid and ignore it.

## Path Vector Cost Type Semantics ##

The new cost type follows the convention of the cost types in the base ALTO
protocol. [](#tbl:cost-type) lists some of the current defined cost types and
their semantics.

Cost Mode   Cost Metric  Semantics
---------   -----------  ---------
numerical   routingcost  a number representing the routing cost
numerical   hopcount     a number representing the hop count
ordinal     routingcost  a ranking representing the routing cost
ordinal     hopcount     a ranking representing the hop count
array       ane-path     a list representing the ane path
--------------------------------
^[tbl:cost-type::Cost Types and Their Semantics]

The `routingcost` and `hopcount` can encoded in `numerical` or `ordinal`,
however, the cost metric `ane-path` can only be applied to the cost mode `array`
defined in this document to convey path vector information. The cost metric
`ane-path` can not be used in `numerical` or `ordinal` unless it is defined in
future extensions. If the ALTO server declares that it support cost type with
cost metric being `ane-path` and cost mode not being `array`, the ALTO client
SHOULD ignore them.

# ANE Domain {#SecANEDomain}

This document specifies a new ALTO entity domain called `ane` in addition to the
ones in [](#I-D.ietf-alto-unified-props-new). The ANE domain associates property
values with the ANEs in a network. The entity in ANE domain is often used in the
path vector by cost maps or endpoint cost resources. Accordingly, the ANE domain
always depends on a cost map or an endpoint cost map.

<!-- This document uses the same definition of entity domain name 'ane' as defined in Section 3.4 of [](#I-D.ietf-alto-unified-props-new). -->

## Domain Name ##

ane

## Domain-Specific Entity Addresses ## {#entity-address}

The entity address of ane domain is encoded as a JSON string.  The string MUST
be no more than 64 characters, and it MUST NOT contain characters other than
US-ASCII alphanumeric characters (U+0030-U+0039, U+0041-U+005A, and
U+0061-U+007A), the hyphen (`-`, U+002D), the colon (`:`, U+003A), the at sign
(`@`, code point U+0040), the low line (`_`, U+005F), or the `.` separator
(U+002E). The `.` separator is reserved for future use and MUST NOT be used
unless specifically indicated in this document, or an extension document.

To simplify the description, we use "ANE name" to indicate the address
of an entity in ANE domain in this document.

The ANE name is usually unrelated to the physical device information. It is
usually generated by the ALTO server on demand and used to distinguish from
other ANEs in its dependent cost map or endpoint cost map.

## Hierarchy and Inheritance

There is no hierarchy or inheritance for properties associated with ANEs.

<!--
## Abstract Network Element Name {#nen-spec}

FIXED: "ANE Name" may not be a good term. It's actually the entity in ANE
domain.

An Abstract Network Element Name is encoded as an EntityAddr of the `ane` domain
as defined in Section 3.4.2 of [](#I-D.ietf-alto-unified-props-new).
-->

# Protocol Extensions for Path Vector# {#SecProtoExt}

To make the ALTO client query the path vectors and properties of ANEs
efficiently and consistently, this document extends the Filtered Cost Map and
Endpoint Cost Service.

## Filtered Cost Map Extensions ##

This document extends Filtered Cost Map, as defined in Section 11.3.2 of
[](#RFC7285), by adding new input parameters and capabilities, and by augmenting
the property map into the data entry of the response.

The "media type", "HTTP method", and "uses" specifications (described in Sections
11.3.2.1, 11.3.2.2, and 11.3.2.5 of [](#RFC7285), respectively) remain the same.

### Accept Input Parameters ### {#fcm-input}

The ReqFilteredCostMap object in Section 11.3.2.3 of [](#RFC7285) is extended as follows:

```
  object {
    [PropertyName compound-properties<1..*>;]
  } ReqPVFilteredCostMap : ReqFilteredCostMap;
```

compound-properties:
~ If the capability `allow-compound-response` is false, the ALTO client MUST NOT
specify this field, and the ALTO server MUST reject the request and return
`E_INVALID_FILED_VALUE` error when it receives a request including this field. If
this field is specified and accepted, the ALTO server MUST augment the dependent
property map with the properties in this field into the response automatically.

### Capabilities ### {#fcm-cap}

The Filtered Cost Map capabilities are extended with two new members:

- dependent-property-map
- allow-compound-response

The capability `dependent-property-map` indicates which property map this
resource depends on, and the capability `allow-compound-response` indicates
whether the ALTO server supports the resource to compound the property map with
its own response data. With these two additional members, the
FilteredCostMapCapabilities object in Section 11.3.2.4 of [](#RFC7285) is
extended as follows:

```
  object {
    [ResourceID dependent-property-map;]
    [JSONBool   allow-compound-response;]
  } PVFCMCapabilities : FilteredCostMapCapabilities;
```

dependent-property-map:
~ This field MUST be specified when the `cost-type-names` includes a cost type
name indicating a `ane-path` metric. Its value MUST be a resource id indicating
a property map including `ane` domain. If not, the ALTO client SHOULD consider
this resource is invalid.


allow-compound-response:
~ If present, the true value means the ALTO client can request the resource to
augment its dependent property map into the response automatically; the false
value means the ALTO client cannot request the compound response. If omitted,
the default value is false;

To be noticed that the capability `cost-constraints` is unexpected for the
`array` cost mode. The syntax and semantics of constraint tests on the `array`
cost mode depends on the implementation and can be defined in the future
documents. But it is not in the scope of this document.

### Response ###

If the ALTO client specifies the `cost-type` input parameter with `ane-path`
metric, the `dependent-vtags` field in the `meta` field of the response MUST
include the version tag of its dependent property map following its dependent
network map.

If the ALTO client specifies the `compound-properties` input parameter which is
accepted by the ALTO server, the response MUST include a `property-map` field
following the `cost-map` field, and its value MUST be a PropertyMapData object.
This PropertyMapData object MUST be equivalent to the result when query the
dependent property map resource using the following request: the `entities`
field includes all the ANE names appearing in the cost values of the `cost-map`
field, the `properties` field has the same value as the `compound-properties`
field does. The properties shown in the `compound-properties` input parameter
but are not supported by the dependent property map SHOULD be omitted from the
response.

## Endpoint Cost Service Extensions ##

This document extends the Endpoint Cost Service, as defined in Section 11.5.1 of
[](#RFC7285), by adding new input parameters and capabilities and by augmenting the
property map into the data entry of the response.

The media type, HTTP method, and "uses" specifications (described in Sections
11.5.1.1, 11.5.1.2, and 11.5.1.5 of [](#RFC7285), respectively) are unchanged.

### Accept Input Parameters ###

The ReqEndpointCostMap object in Section 11.5.1.3 of [](#RFC7285) is extended as follows:

```
  object {
    [PropertyName compound-properties<1..*>;]
  } ReqPVEndpointCostMap : ReqEndpointCostMap;
```

The `compound-properties` has the same interpretation as defined in [](#fcm-input).

### Capabilities ###

The extensions to the Endpoint Cost Service capabilities are identical to the
extensions to the Filtered Cost Map (see [](#fcm-cap)).

### Response ###

If the ALTO client specifies the `cost-type` input parameter with `ane-path`
metric, the response MUST include the `meta` field with the `dependent-vtags` in
it, and the `dependent-vtags` field MUST include the version tag of its
dependent property map.

<!-- TODO: reduce the description of thie paragraph as possible -->

If the ALTO client specifies the `compound-properties` input parameter which is
accepted by the ALTO server, the response MUST include a `property-map` field
following the `endpoint-cost-map` field, and its value MUST be a PropertyMapData object.
This PropertyMapData object MUST be equivalent to the result when query the
dependent property map resource using the following request: the `entities`
field includes all the ANE names appearing in the cost values of the `endpoint-cost-map`
field, the `properties` field has the same value as the `compound-properties`
field does. The properties shown in the `compound-properties` input parameter
but are not supported by the dependent property map SHOULD be omitted from the
response.

<!--
# Multipart Service # {#SecMultiService}

This document introduces a new ALTO service called `Multipart Service`, which allows a server to provide multiple resources in a single response.

## Media Type ##

The media type of the multipart service is `multipart/related`.

## HTTP Method ##

The Multipart service is requested using the HTTP POST method.

## Accept Input Parameters ##

The input parameters of the Multipart service MUST be encoded as a JSON object in the body of an HTTP POST request. The media type of the request SHOULD be one of `application/alto-costmapfilter+json` and `application/alto-endpointcostparams+json`. The format of the request body depends on the media type:

- If the media type of the request is `application/alto-costmapfilter+json`, the request body MUST be the same type as defined by []().
- If the media type of the request is `application/alto-endpointcostparams+json`, the request body MUST be the same type as defined by []().

The path vector cost type MUST be the only cost type in the input parameter.

## Capabilities ##

```
```

## Uses ##

COMMENT: an ANE Property Map MUST be used. Because the client need to know
which properties the server can provide.

The `uses` attribute MUST be an array with at least one resource id. The first resource id MUST point to a Filtered Cost Map or an Endpoint Cost Service resource. And the path vector cost type MUST be in its `cost-type` capability. If there are more than one resource id in the `uses` attribute, the ALTO client SHOULD ignore any additional resource ids.

COMMENT: This paragraph is not readable.

According to [](), the `property-map` field MUST be present in the first resource. So the ALTO client MUST infer that the Property Map pointed by the `property-map` field of the first resource is also a dependent resource.

## Response ##

COMMENT: We need to clarify whether the property map is "anonymous". And if
so, we need to define how the server handle "anonymous" property map, and how
the client show interpret.

COMMENT: The writing is pretty poor and has a lot of redundancy.

If an ALTO client sends a request of the media type `application/alto-costmapfilter+json` and accepts `multipart/related`, the HTTP body of the response MUST consist of two parts with the media types `application/alto-costmap+json` and `application/alto-propmap+json` accordingly. The part with media type `application/alto-costmap+json` MUST be the first part. The content of the `application/alto-costmap+json` part has the same format as defined in Section 11.2.3.6 of [](#RFC7285).

If an ALTO client sends a request of the media type `application/alto-endpointcostparams+json` and accepts `multipart/related`, the HTTP body of the response MUST consist of two parts with the media types `application/alto-endpointcost+json` and `application/alto-propmap+json` accordingly. The part with media type `application/alto-endpointcost+json` MUST be the first part. The content of the `application/alto-endpointcost+json` part has the same format as defined in Section 11.5.1.6 of [](#RFC7285).
-->
